---
title: Version Control and Academic Writing
author: Colin McLear
date: 2015-07-17
tags: geekery, writing, workflows
---

Academic writing typically requires writing something in drafts. Many drafts. Until
recently there have been few ways of elegantly handling this. Often, one would
need to title the current draft with the day's date, then save this draft in a
folder (named, e.g., "drafts" or "versions"), and do this every time one sits
down to write. This works, in some ways. The data is there. The problem is that
you quickly end up with a folder (or desktop's) worth of files. These filenames
have typically ridiculous and increasingly obscure titles (e.g.
4_26_13_Really_Final_FinalPaper.docx). And it is seldom clear, using this
method, exactly what one did when, without actually opening a particular file
and looking, or trying to remember when (and where) it was that one made the
relevant change. 

Nowadays, especially if you use some sort of cloud-based word-processor, it's
likely that you have access to various ways of looking at your version history.
For example, Google docs has a [revision
history](https://support.google.com/docs/answer/190843?hl=en) option (something
similar exists for [Dropbox](http://www.macinstruct.com/node/516), which lets
you easily move back and forth among different versions. Revision histories of
this kind offer a way to automatically back up one's writing. This is especially
helpful if you're not the type of person to carefully name each day's writing
with a new time/date stamp and save them all in the appropriate folder. There
are also service (as opposed to application) specific ways of tracking changes
to a file. At least [some](http://versionrocket.com) of
[them](http://versionrocket.com) allow you to compare differences between
versions of files. But at least two things are missing. First, there is no
straightforward way of seeing what has changed where, and to see this at
arbitrary levels of granularity. Second, in order to see what's changed when,
you have to look in the document itself. There is no general log of the changes
you've made to the file.  

Here's what I have in mind:

![Change Log]({filename}/images/ScreenShot52964.png) 

You see on the left a series of entries going back over two years, with a description
of what I took to be the most important changes at the time. I can then open any
one of the those entries and see a more detailed, line by line, description of
changes. This is called a "diff". I can also roll back the version of the file
I'm working on to any of these changes. Each "commit" is a snapshot of the
relevant files at the time, which I can retrieve at any point. 

I think this is a really nice way to track and visualize one's progress on some
piece of writing. This is hard to do with standard word processors and their
means of versioning, but very straightforward to do with a more sophisticated
kind of [version control
system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Revision_control). A version control
system can manage changes to a file at an extremely fine level of grain--down to
a line or character if necessary. While this system was originally adopted by
programmers, it can also be very useful in academic writing (or really any
writing where multiple drafts are created). 

This form of version control pictured above depends on a system called
*[Git]*.[^mercurial] There are lots of [tutorials] and [other resources] for
using Git. Though Git is often used from the command line there are also some
[great] free [graphical interfaces] for Git. There are also a lot of helpful
[discussions] online concerning writing while using a version control system
like Git.

[^mercurial]: You might also look at [Mercurial](https://mercurial.selenic.com),
which is a popular, and perhaps slightly easier to use, alternative to Git.

The basic idea is that, using whatever writing application one likes, one tracks
changes to a document, or a whole directory of documents (e.g. adding image
files for presentations, or additional parts of a document kept in separate
files when writing longer works like a thesis or novel). The changes can be
tracked at an arbitrary level of grain--to the sentence, word, or character--and
different versions can be easily compared. All of this can be done without
generating lots of files with different numbers or date/time stamps. Everything
is kept in a database that one can easily interact with using either the command
line or some form of graphical interface. 

So far, this isn't necessarily any different from what one can do using Word or
Google Docs. One additional benefit of using a version control system is that
one can easily label and describe batches of changes (e.g. revisions to a
particular section of a paper or chapter) and keep a single record of these
changes. Then, if one want to look back at one's progress, or for a specific
change that one made, all one need do is look at the single general document
listing the changes. You can even do this in the text editor of your choice
(e.g. vim or sublime text) 

For example, here's a sample log of the changes made to a paper I've been
working on, using a vim plugin called "[gitv](https://github.com/gregsexton/gitv)",
which depends on Tim Pope's [fugitive](https://github.com/tpope/vim-fugitive)
plugin ([SublimeGit](https://sublimegit.net) is an equally excellent sublime
text plugin). 

![]({filename}/images/ScreenShot56089.png)

On the left is the git log of changes. On the right is a more detailed
description of what changed--what was added, deleted, or moved.


  [Git]: https://git-scm.com
  [tutorials]: http://rogerdudler.github.io/git-guide/
  [other resources]: https://www.atlassian.com/git/
  [great]: http://gitup.co
  [graphical interfaces]: https://www.sourcetreeapp.com
  [discussions]: http://writers.stackexchange.com/questions/10440/what-is-the-purpose-of-version-control/10443#10443

## Using Git

The basic workflow for using Git is as follows. In the directory you're keeping
your project in (you do keep this in a directory and not just on your desktop
right?) you need to create a Git repository. This means typing `git init` on the
command line from the directory, or doing so via whatever GUI app you've picked.
You only have to do this once per writing project. So that's:

- `cd \path\to\repository`
- `git init`
- `git add filename.file`
- `git commit`
  - write commit message
  - write and quit file

Once you've got your repository (or "repo") you need to add files for tracking. 
Just type `git add` and the name of the file you're tracking. Then type `git
commit`. You'll then type a commit message to go along with the commit--e.g.
"first commit". Write and quit, or press commit in whatever application you're
using. At this point you've got a functioning version control system. So your
workflow should be something like the following:

- Write
- Add/stage changes
- Write commit message and commit

There's a lot to Git that I can't cover here. It can be very helpful when
experimenting with an idea. It's also a nice way to think about and track your
work over time. One downside of using a system like git is that it doesn't work
well with Microsoft Word or other rich text WYSIWIG text editors. But there are
ways
[around](http://blog.martinfenner.org/2014/08/25/using-microsoft-word-with-git/)
[this](https://www.martineve.com/2013/08/18/using-git-in-my-writing-workflow/).

If you like the idea of git, commit messages, and a readable log of changes
you've made to a file, but don't want to deal with the more technical aspects of
setting up git and using it, there are also great web apps like
[Penflip](https://www.penflip.com), which streamline much of the process. 


